---
layout: page
title: "Promoting agency for social-ecological transformation"
smallimg: /showcase/tlabs_practices.png
description: "A transformation-lab in the Xochimilco social-ecological system"
---

Experiments to create spaces for social-ecological transformation are
multiplying. These experiments aim at transcending traditional spaces
for rational deliberation, planning, and participatory
decision-making. We present a methodological approach for triggering
the emergence of “transformation laboratories” (T-labs), which are
participatory spaces where new agency is activated in relation to a
stagnant sustainability challenge to generate intentional bottom-up
transformations. We applied a set of participatory research tools to
elicit current perceptions and foster personal involvement in
transforming the ongoing urbanization of a culturally and ecologically
significant historical wetland in Mexico City. Given that the
emergence of T-labs as genuine bottom-up transformative spaces
involves changes at multiple levels (individual, collective, and
social-ecological), our approach was designed to promote a safe space
that stimulates openness and personal interaction. We posit that
through enabling participants to reformulate their connections to the
system, to others in the system, and to themselves, the system may be
transformed from the inside out. We argue that transformation, in this
sense, is essentially about how changes in perception about one’s own
role in the system’s dynamics translate into changes in agency.  Our
T-lab brought in 19 agents involved in the use and management of the
Xochimilco urban wetland. Through a set of research tools, we elicited
and presented information that helped agents to see their
social-ecological position and role and to identify the practices they
share with others within specific social networks and spaces of
action. We argue that the process of collaboration initiated by our
application of these tools and communication of their results are key
for advancing initiatives that seek to create conditions for
endogenous transformations.

Read more at [Ecology and Society](https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol23/iss2/art46/).

![how individual agency is identified](https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol23/iss2/art46/figure4.png)


